She grew up in a family where she felt invisible.
And she endured a marriage where she felt unwanted.
In fact, the Bible states that Jacob loved Rachel more
than her sister, Leah.
How sad Leah must have felt when she
saw that her younger sister was clearly the favorite.
And those feelings were not simply imagined.
At Genesis chapter 29 verse 31, we are told that Jehovah
too saw that Leah was unloved.
Or as the footnote says, loved less.
No doubt Leah suffered with feelings
of insecurity, rejection, and loneliness.
At first glance, Leah's story may seem to be one
filled mainly with nothing more than disappointment.
Would she ever become more than just the substitute
in Jacob's eyes?
Well, the Bible's record of Leah takes us on a unique journey.
Let's take a closer look at her life.
Let's turn please to Genesis chapter 29.
And let's pick up Leah's story at verse 32.
Genesis 29 32 says, so Leah became pregnant and gave birth
to a son and named him Rubin.
For she said, it is because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction.
For now, my husband will begin to love me.
And she again became pregnant and gave birth to a son
and then said, it is because Jehovah has listened
in that I was unloved.
So he gave me this one also.
Then she named him Simeon.
And she became pregnant yet again and gave birth to a son
and then said, now this time, my husband would join himself
to me because I have borne him three sons.
Therefore, he was named Levi.
Did you notice a pattern in the way she named these first three sons?
She's naming them based on her feelings.
With each of these sons, she pinned all her hopes of happiness.
And each time, those hopes were dashed miserably.
But Jacob's feelings did not appear to change.
Leah's situation did not change.
She was still the wife less loved, the spare, the substitute.
But now somewhere between the birth of her third and fourth sons,
something changed for Leah.
What was it?
Let's pick up the account again in verse 35.
It says, and she became pregnant once more
and gave birth to a son, sorry.
And then said, this time, I will praise Jehovah.
She therefore named him Judah.
Did you see the difference?
Leah experienced a change of heart.
And this change of heart remained consistent
with the rest of the sons born by her
and her maidservant, Zilpa.
Notice how Leah named them.
Gad, with good fortune,
Asher, with my happiness,
Esacar, God has given me my wages in Zebulin.
God has endowed me, yes, me, with a good endowment.
The names of these sons reveal what?
That Leah shifted her focus
from seeking the favor of her husband
to more importantly seeking Jehovah's favor.
She stopped longing for what she did not have
and began appreciating what Jehovah was giving her
as she herself said, a good endowment or legacy.
And while Jacob continued to favor Rachel,
ahead of Leah for the rest of her life,
it no longer mattered to Leah
because her outlook had changed.
No longer was it about her and Jacob,
but now about her and Jehovah.
And this shift in perspective allowed her to go from,
whoa is me to how happy I am.
And because of this contented feeling,
Leah never ran away from her situation
as did Hagar, the maid servant of Sarah.
Nor does she become embittered
and with wild talk like Job's wife did.
Instead, Leah stayed the course and Jehovah noticed.
He saw her aching heart.
And he honored this faithful woman.
How so?
Not only did Leah become the mother
to half the tribes of Israel,
but two of her sons were who?
Yes, Judah and Levi.
Who would become the founders of the priestly
and kingly lines of Israel leading directly
to the Messiah himself?
Centuries later, at Ruth chapter 4 verse 11,
Leah is mentioned alongside Rachel
as the two women who built the house of Israel.
Leah was no mere substitute.
She became a matriarch and what about Jacob?
Did he ever change in his view of Leah as the wife?
He loved less?
We don't know.
But it's interesting to note
that when Jacob was delivering his deathbed prophecy,
he expressed his wishes to be laid to rest
in his family burial site, not in Egypt,
but in the land of Canaan, alongside who?
Let's go to Genesis 49 verse 31 for the answer.
These are Jacob's own words.
In Genesis 49, 31, he said,
there they buried Abraham and his wife Sarah.
There they buried Isaac and his wife Rebecca
and there I buried Leah.
Think about that for a moment.
There is no mention of Rachel being buried there.
We don't know why, but imagine how Leah will feel
when she has resurrected and learns
that she was included among this very special group
of honored servants of God.
Well, what lesson can we learn from Leah's story?
First, avoid the snare of thinking,
I'll be happy when.
Remember true happiness and self-worth comes
from gaining Jehovah's approval in favor,
more so than that of any imperfect human.
Second, make it your goal
to make others feel seen.
Do all you can to never let them leave you
feeling overlooked, but rather appreciate it.
And then next, see the Leahs around you
and your Jehovah will see you.
Third, remember that life is not always going to be fair.
Jacob's treatment of Leah could easily be considered
as unfair, but rather than feeling
like nothing more than a footnote
to someone else's adventure,
no, Leah allowed Jehovah to write her story
of faith and endurance.
And it's all right here for us to read
and benefit from today.
So dear graduates, wherever your spiritual journey takes you,
remember the faithful woman, Leah.
No matter what ups and downs that you make experience,
focus on the things Jehovah has given you
and stay the course like Leah did.
She went from feeling like a mere stand-in
to realizing that the ultimate substitute was in fact
who, Jehovah, who stepped in and absorbed all the pain
in her heart.
And just as Jehovah loved Leah, he loves each one of you too
and is always ready to step in as your substitute.